# Webinar

## New features of ezEML

March 15, 2022

### Description

ezEML is EDI’s web-based tool that lets even EML newbies create and edit EML metadata for their data packages. When ezEML was first introduced, we demonstrated its Release 1.0 features in a webinar [https://youtu.be/LVRoFmTwvtU](https://youtu.be/LVRoFmTwvtU). But a lot has changed since then. A number of significant new features have been added, and another ezEML webinar seems called for. We demonstrated what’s new, answered questions, and welcomed feedback. A few of the most significant additions:

 - Re-upload of data tables and other data entities.
 - Cloning column properties from one data table to another.
 - Export/import complete ezEML data packages, including metadata and all data files. Such packages can be downloaded locally, or you can share a URL with others that lets them download the packages from our servers and open them in ezEML.
 - Send a data package directly to a colleague or to EDI’s data curation team.
 - Import EML XML files that were created outside of ezEML.
 - Fetch a data package directly from the EDI data repository and open it in ezEML in a single step. Optionally, fetch the associated data files as well.
 - Create ezEML templates that are hosted on our servers and available for use by everyone on your team.

All ezEML users should benefit from these and other new features, but a number of them may be of particular interest to information managers. We demonstrated their use, and we hope you’ll like what you see.

### Speaker

Jon Ide (EDI)

### Recording: [YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QRCDeLGPYms)

<!-- Webinars -->
